
.. include:: index

================================================================================
Syntax
================================================================================

:Author: Andrew Carnie

:Date: 2001

:Abstract:
    This book is intended as an introduction to syntactic theory. It takes the
    student through most of the major issues in Principles and Parameters, from
    tree drawing to constraints on movement.

.. contents::

.. sectnum::

################################################################################
Preliminaries
################################################################################

********************************************************************************
Generative Grammar
********************************************************************************

Preliminaries
================================================================================

Some definitions:

- Syntax_

Language is a psychological, or cognitive, property of humans.

Phonetics is the study of acoustics and articulation of speech.

Phonology is the science of how we analyze sounds into syllables and pattern
them appropriately.

Morphology is the study of language at level of organizing group of sounds into
meaningful units.

Semantics is the study of taking sentences and phrases and translating them into
thoughts and idea.

Syntax as Cognitive Science
================================================================================

Cognitive science is a cover term for a group of disciplines that all aim for
the same goal: describing and explaining human being's ability to think.

One thing that distinguishes us from animals is our ability to use language.
Language plays an important role in how we think about abstract notions, or, at
the very least, language appears to be structured in such a way that it allows
us to express abstract notions.

The discipline of linguistics, along with psychology, philosophy, and computer
science, thus form an important subdiscipline withing cognitive science.

Modeling Syntax
================================================================================

The dominant theory of syntax is due to `Noam Chomsky` and his followers,
starting in the mid 1950s and continuing to this day. This theory, which has had
many different names through its development (`Transformational Grammar` (TG),
`Transformational Generative Grammar`, `Standard Theory`, `Extended Standard
Theory`, `Government and Binding Theory` (GB), `Principles and Parameters
approach` (P&P), and Minimalism (MP)), is of given the blanket name `Generative
Grammar`. A number of alternate theories of syntax have also branched off of
this research program; these include `Lexical Functional Grammar` (LFG) and
`Head Driven Phrase Structure Grammar` (HPSG).

The particular version of generative grammar that we will mostly look at here is
roughly the `Principles and Parts approach` although we will occasionally stray
from this into Minimalism.

The underlying theses of generative grammar is that sentences are generated by
a subconscious set of procedures. These procedures are part of our minds. The
goal of syntactic theory is to model these procedures.

In generative grammar, the means for modeling these procedures is through a set
of formal grammatical rules, which tell us the order in which to put word. These
rules are through to generate the sentences of a language, hence the name
*generative* grammar. These rules tell you step by step how to put together
words into a sentence.

Syntax as Science: The Scientific Method
================================================================================

It is a mistake to believe that the study of language should be confined to a
humanistic approach. It is also possible to study language from a scientific
perspective; the domain of linguistics.

In syntax, we apply the scientific method to sentence structure. Syntacticians
start by observing data about the language they are studying, then make
generalizations about patterns in the data. They then generate a testable
hypothesis and test their hypotheses against more syntactic data.

The hypotheses are called rules, and the group of hypotheses that describe a
language's syntax is called a grammar.

There are two ways to go about writing grammatical rules:

1. Prescriptive rules, which prescribe how people should speak

2. Descriptive rules, which describe how people actually speak

Descriptive rules give us insight into how the mind uses languages, so we focus
on them.

An example is given with anaphors, demonstrating how they must agree in person,
gender, and number with their antecedents, and showing how this rule evolves
from simpler hypotheses.

Some definitions are given:

Person is a grammatical distinction that refers to the perspective of the
speaker with respect to the other participants in the speech act. First person
refers to the speaker. Second person refers to the listener. Third person refers
to people being discussed that aren't participating in the conversation.

Each English pronoun is associated with a certain person. Nominative refers to
the case form the pronouns take when in subject position like "I" in "I love
peanut butter"; "accusative" refers to the form they when in object positions
like "me" in "John loves me".

A note is given about whether or not rules really exist. A distinction between
psychology and neurology is given. Psychology is concerned with the mind, which
represents the output of the brain. Neurology is concerned with the actual iring
of the neurons, and the physiology of the brain. Generative grammar is not a
theory of neurology, but a theory of psychology. (See Further Reading for more)

Sources of Data
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we are going to apply the scientific method to syntax, it is important to
consider the sources of data.

One obvious source is in collections of either spoken or written text, or
`corpora` (singular corpus). For languages without a literary tradition or ones
spoken by a small minority, it is often necessary for the linguist to go and
gather data and compile a corpus in the field.

While corpora are valuable sources of data,they can only be a partial
representation of what goes on in the mind. More particularly, corpora will only
contain instances of grammatical (or more precisely well-formed) sentences. This
means there is no way of knowing whether a corpus has all possible forms of
grammatical sentences. In fact, due to the infinite and productive nature of
language, a corpus could never contain all the grammatical forms of a language,
nor could it even contains a representative sample.

To really get at what we know about our language, (remember syntax is a
cognitive science) we have to know what sentences are not well-formed. This kind
of information is not available in corpora.

The psychological experiment used to get subconscious knowledge is called the
`grammatically judgment task`. The judgment involves asking a native speaker to
read a sentence, and judge whether it is well-formed, marginally well-formed, or
ill-formed.

There are several different kinds of grammatically judgements. An ill-formed
sentences could be so for different reasons.

- A sentence could be semantically ill-formed if its form is okay, but it has no
  meaning (e.g. "The toothbrush is pregnant"). Semantically ill-formed are
  marked with a ``#``.

- A sentence could be syntactically ill-formed if we can deduce the meaning, but
  its form is bad (e.g. "Toothbrush the is blue").

In this text, we will be concerned primarily with syntactic well-formedness.

Questions:

- Why do we use "well-formed" instead of "grammatical"?

- Why do we need ungrammatical sentences?

Where do Rules Come From?
================================================================================

This is sort of a side issue, but affects the shape of our theory.

If we know how children acquire their rules, then we are in a better position
for a proper formalization of them. The theory of generative grammar makes
something very specific claims about this.

Learning vs. Acquisition
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cognitive scientists make a distinction in how we get conscious and
subconscious knowledge. Conscious knowledge is *learned*. Subconscious knowledge
is *acquired*.

Not all rules of grammar are acquired. Some facts about language seem to be
built into our brains, or *innate*.

Innateness: Language as an Instinct
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Instincts are subconscious knowledge that are built into us. For example,
walking.

Noam Chomsky controversially claims that Language is also an instinct. Many
part of Language are innate.

There are good reasons to believe that a human facility for Language (perhaps in
the form of a "Language organ" in the brain) is innate. We call this facility
`Universal Grammar`_.

The Logical Problem of Language Acquisition
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here we show that from a logical perspective, an infinite productive system like
the rules of language cannot have been learned or acquired.

Infinite systems are neither learnable nor acquirable. Since we have such an
infinite system in our heads, and we can't have learned it, it must be the case
that it is built in. (The argument presented her is based on an unpublished
paper by Alec Marantz)

Language is an infinitely productive system; a speaker can produce and
understand sentences he has never hear before. This is because language is
recursive; it always possible to embed a sentence inside of a larger one.

It turns out that rule-generated infinite systems like language not learninable,
as a simple fact of logic.

Infinite systems are unlearnable because one never has enough input to be sure
one has all the relevant facts. This is called the logical problem of language
acquisition.

Generative grammar gets around this logical puzzle by claiming that Universal
Grammar helps children construct a knowledge of language by restricting the
number of possible functions that map between situations and utterances.

Other Arguments for UG
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The evidence for UG doesn't rely on the logical problem alone.

Explaining Language Variation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Choosing among Theories about Syntax
================================================================================

Summary
================================================================================

Ideas, rules, and constraints introduced in this chapter:

1. Syntax

2. Language (capital L)

3. language (lower case l)

4. Generative Grammar

5. The Scientifc method

6. Grammar

7. Prescriptive grammar

8. Descriptive grammar

9. Anaphor

10. Antecedent

11. Asterik

12. Number

13. Person

14. Case

15. Nominative

16. Accusative

17. Corpus

18. Native speaker judgements

19. Semantic judgement

20. Syntactic judgement

21. Learning

22. Acqustion

23. Recursion

24. Observationally adequate grammar

25. Descriptively adequate grammar

26. Explanatorily adequate grammar

27. Innate

28 .Universal Grammar (UG)

29. The Logical Problem of Language Acqusition

30. Undetermination of the Data

31. Universal

********************************************************************************
Fundamentals: Rules, Trees, Parts of Speech
********************************************************************************

Introduction
================================================================================

Parts of speech
================================================================================

Structure
================================================================================

Rules and trees
================================================================================

Noun phrases
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Adjective phrases and adverb phrases
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prepositional phrases
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Verb phrases
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Clauses
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Summary
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

How to draw a tree
================================================================================

Bottom-up trees
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The top-down method of drawing trees
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bracketed diagrams
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Modification and ambiguity
=================================================================================

Constituency tests
=================================================================================

Summary and conclusion
=================================================================================

Appendix
=================================================================================

Open vs closed classes of speech


Linguistic theory distinguish two kind of lexical items. Parts of speech are
divided into open and closed class items. Membership in open classes (Nouns,
verbs, adjectives) categories is unlimited. New words may be coined at any time
if they are open class. Membership in closed class by contrast is limited and
coinages are rare.

********************************************************************************
Structural Relations
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Binding Theory
********************************************************************************

################################################################################
The Base
################################################################################

********************************************************************************
X-bar Theory
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Extending the Proposal: TPs, CPs, and DPs
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Constraining X-bar Theory: Theta Roles and the Lexicon
********************************************************************************

################################################################################
Transformation Rules
################################################################################

********************************************************************************
Head to Head Movement
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
NP Movement
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Raising, Control, and Empty Categories
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Wh-movement
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Towards Minimalism
********************************************************************************

################################################################################
Alternatives
################################################################################

********************************************************************************
Alternative Approaches: LFG
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Alternative Approaches: HPSG
********************************************************************************

********************************************************************************
Conclusions
********************************************************************************

################################################################################
Where to Go From Here
################################################################################
